there is a hole at the bottom of math
a hole that means we will never know
everything with certainty
there will always be true statements
that cannot be proven
now no one knows what those statements
are exactly
but they could be something like the
twin prime conjecture
twin primes are prime numbers that are
separated by just one number
like 11 and 13 or 17 and 19.
and as you go up the number line primes
occur less frequently
and twin primes are rarer still but the
twin prime conjecture
is that there are infinitely many twin
primes you never
run out as of right now
no one has proven this conjecture true
or false
but the crazy thing is this we
may never know because what has been
proven
is that in any system of mathematics
where you can do basic arithmetic
there will always be true statements
that are
impossible to prove that
is life
specifically this is the game of life
created in 1970 by mathematician john
conway
sadly he passed away in 2020 from covet
19.
conway's game of life is played on an
infinite grid of square cells
each of which is either live or dead and
there are only two rules
one any dead cell with exactly three
neighbors
comes to life and two any living cell
with
less than two or more than three
neighbors dies
once you've set up the initial
arrangement of cells
the two rules are applied to create the
next generation
and then the one after that and the one
after that and so on
it's totally automatic conway called it
a zero player game
but even though the rules are simple the
game itself can generate a wide variety
of behavior
some patterns are stable once they arise
they never change
others oscillate back and forth in a
loop
a few can travel across the grid forever
like this glider here
many patterns just fizzle out
but a few keep growing forever
they keep generating new cells
now you would think that given the
simple rules of the game you could just
look at any pattern and determine what
will happen to it will it eventually
reach a steady state
or will it keep growing without limit
but it turns out
this question is impossible to answer
the ultimate fate of a pattern in
conway's game of life is
undecidable meaning there is no possible
algorithm
that is guaranteed to answer the
question in a finite amount of time
you could always just try running the
pattern and see what happens
i mean the rules of the game are a kind
of algorithm after all
but that's not guaranteed to give you an
answer either because
even if you run it for a million
generations you won't be able to say
whether it'll last
forever or just 2 million generations or
a billion or a googleplex
is there something special about the
game of life that makes it
undecidable nope there are actually
a huge number of systems that are
undecidable
like wang tiles quantum physics airline
ticketing systems
and even magic the gathering
to understand how undecidability shows
up in all of these places
we have to go back 150 years to a
full-blown revolt
in mathematics
in 1874 georg cantor a german
mathematician
published a paper that launched a new
branch of mathematics called set theory
a set is just a well-defined collection
of things
so the two shoes on your feet are a set
as are all the planetariums in the world
there's a set with nothing in it the
empty set
and a set with everything in it now
cantor was thinking about
sets of numbers like natural numbers
positive integers like 1
2 3 4 and so on and real numbers which
include fractions
like a third five halves and also
irrational numbers like
pi e and the square root of two
basically
any number that can be represented as an
infinite decimal
he wondered are there more natural
numbers
or more real numbers between zero and
one
the answer might seem obvious there are
an infinite number of each
so both sets should be the same size but
to check this logic
canter imagined writing down an infinite
list matching up each natural number on
one side
with a real number between zero and one
on the other
now since each real number is an
infinite decimal there is no
first one so we can just write them down
in any random order
the key is to make sure we get them all
with no duplicates
and line them up one to one with an
integer
if we can do that with none left over
well then we know that the set of
natural numbers and the set of real
numbers between 0 and 1
are the same size so assume we've done
that
we have a complete infinite list with
each integer
acting like an index number a unique
identifier for each real number on the
list
now cantor says start writing down a new
real number
and the way we're going to do it is by
taking the first
digit of the first number and adding one
then take the second digit of the second
number and again add one
take the third digit of the third number
add one and keep doing this
all the way down the list if the digit
is a nine just roll it back to an eight
and by the end of this process you'll
have a real number between zero
and one but here's the thing
this number won't appear anywhere on our
list
it's different from the first number in
the first decimal place different from
the second number in the second decimal
place
and so on down the line it has to be
different from
every number on the list by at least one
digit
the number on the diagonal
that's why this is called cantor's
diagonalization proof
it shows there must be more real numbers
between 0
and 1 then there are natural numbers
extending out to
infinity so not all infinities are the
same
size cantor call these countable and
uncountable infinities respectively and
in fact there are many more
uncountable infinities which are even
larger
now cantor's work was just the latest
blow to mathematics for 2000 years
euclid's elements were considered the
bedrock of the discipline
but at the turn of the 19th century
lobashevsky and gauss discovered
non-euclidean geometries and this
prompted mathematicians to examine more
closely the foundations of their field
and they did not like what they saw the
idea of a limit
at the heart of calculus turned out to
be poorly defined
and now cantor was showing that infinity
itself was much more complex than anyone
had imagined
in all this upheaval mathematics
fractured
and a huge debate broke out among
mathematicians at the end of the 1800s
on the one side were the intuitionists
who thought that cantor's work was
nonsense they were convinced that math
was a pure creation of the human mind
and that infinities like cantors weren't
real
auri puankere said that later
generations will regard set theory as a
disease from which one has recovered
leopold chronicler called cantor a
scientific charlatan
and a corrupter of the youth and he
worked to keep cantor from getting a job
he wanted
on the other side were the formalists
they thought that math could be put on
absolutely secure logical foundations
through cantor's set theory
the informal leader of the formalists
was the german mathematician david
hilbert
hilbert was a living legend a hugely
influential mathematician who had worked
in nearly every area
of mathematics he almost beat einstein
to the punch on general relativity
he developed entirely new mathematical
concepts that were crucial for quantum
mechanics
and he knew that cantor's work was
brilliant
hilbert was convinced that a more formal
and rigorous system of mathematical
proof based on set theory
could solve all the issues that had
cropped up in math over the last century
and most other mathematicians agreed
with him
no one shall expel us from the paradise
that cantor has created
hilbert declared but in 1901 bertrand
russell pointed out a serious problem in
cantor's set theory russell knew that if
sets can contain anything
they can contain other sets or even
themselves
for example the set of all sets must
contain itself
as does the set of sets with more than
five elements in them
you could even talk about the set of all
sets that contain themselves
but this leads straight to a problem
what about
r the set of all sets that don't contain
themselves
if r doesn't contain itself well then it
must contain itself
but if r does contain itself then by
definition it must not contain itself
so r contains itself if and only if
it doesn't russell had found another
paradox of self-reference
and he later explained his paradox using
a hairy
analogy let's say there's a village
populated entirely by
grown men with a strange law against
beards specifically the law states that
the village barber must shave all
and only those men of the village who do
not shave themselves
but the barber himself lives in the
village too of course and
he's a man so who shaves him
if he doesn't shave himself then the
barber has to shave him
but the barber can't shave himself
because the barber doesn't shave anyone
who shaves themselves
so the barber must shave himself if and
only if
he doesn't shave himself it's a
contradiction
the intuitionists rejoiced at russell's
paradox thinking it had proven set
theory
hopelessly flawed but zermelo and other
mathematicians from hilbert school
solved the problem by restricting the
concept of a set
so the collection of all sets for
example is not a set anymore
and neither is the collection of all
sets which don't contain themselves
this eliminated the paradoxes that come
with self-reference
hilbert and the formalists lived to
fight another day but
self-reference refused to die quite that
easily
fast forward to the 1960s and
mathematician hal wang was looking at
square tiles with different colors on
each side like these
the rules were that touching edges must
be the same color
and you can't rotate or reflect tiles
only
slide them around the question was if
you're given an arbitrary set of these
tiles can you tell
if they will tile the plane that is will
they connect up with
no gaps all the way out to infinity it
turns out
you can't tell for an arbitrary set of
tiles whether they will tile the plane
or not
the problem is undecidable just like the
fate of a pattern in conway's game of
life
in fact it's exactly the same problem
and that problem
ultimately comes from self-reference as
hilbert and the formalists were about to
discover
hilbert wanted to secure the foundations
of mathematics by developing a new
system for mathematical proofs
systems of proof were an old idea going
back to the ancient greeks
a system of proof starts with axioms
basic statements that are assumed to be
true
like a straight line can be drawn
between any two points
proofs are then constructed from those
axioms using rules of inference
methods for using existing statements to
derive new statements
and these are chosen to preserve truth
the existing statements are true
then so are the new ones hilbert wanted
a
formal system of proof a symbolic
logical language with a rigid set of
manipulation rules for those symbols
logical and mathematical statements
could then be translated into this
system
if you drop a book then it will fall
would be a then b
and no human is immortal would be
expressed like this
hilbert and the formalists wanted to
express the axioms of mathematics as
symbolic statements in a formal system
and set up the rules of inference as the
system's rules for
symbol manipulation so russell along
with alfred north whitehead
developed a formal system like this in
their three-volume principia mathematica
published in 1913. principia mathematica
is
vast a total of nearly 2 000 pages of
dense mathematical notation it takes 762
pages
just to get to a complete proof that one
plus one equals two
at which point russell and whitehead
dryly note the
above proposition is occasionally useful
the authors had originally planned a
fourth volume but unsurprisingly
they were too worn out to complete it so
yes the notation is dense and exhausting
but it is
also exact unlike ordinary languages
it leaves no room for errors or fuzzy
logic to creep in
and most importantly it allows you to
prove
properties of the formal system itself
there were three big questions that
hilbert wanted answered about
mathematics
number one is math complete
meaning is there a way to prove every
true statement does every true statement
have a proof number two is mathematics
consistent meaning is it free of
contradictions
i mean if you can simultaneously prove a
and
not a then that's a real problem because
you can prove
anything at all and number three is
math decidable meaning is there an
algorithm that can always determine
whether a statement
follows from the axioms now hilbert was
convinced that the answers to
all three of these questions was yes
at a major conference in 1930 hilbert
gave a fiery speech about these
questions
he ended it with a line that summed up
his formalist dream
in opposition to the foolish ignorabus
which means we will not know
our slogan shall be we must know
we will know these words are literally
on his grave but by the time hilbert
gave this speech
his dream was already crumbling just the
day before at a small meeting at the
same conference a 24 year old logician
named kurt gerdel
explained that he had found the answer
to the first of hilbert's three big
questions about completeness
and the answer was no a complete
formal system of mathematics was
impossible the
only person who paid much attention was
john von neumann
one of hilbert's former students who
pulled godel aside to ask a few
questions
but the next year goodell published a
proof of his incompleteness theorem
and this time everyone including hilbert
took notice
this is how goodle's proof works goodl
wanted to use logic and mathematics
to answer questions about the very
system
of logic and mathematics and so he took
all these basic symbols of a
mathematical system
and then he gave each one a number
this is known as the symbol's goodall
number
so the symbol for not gets the number
one
or has the goodall number two
if then it's goodall number three now if
you're expressing all of these symbols
with numbers
then what do you do about the numbers
themselves
well zero gets its own goodal number six
and if you want to write a one
you just put this successor symbol next
to it the
immediate successor of zero is 1.
and if you want to write 2 then you have
to write ss0
and that represents 2 and so on so you
could represent any positive integer
this way
granted it is cumbersome but it works
and that is the point of this system
so now that we have goodall numbers for
all of the basic symbols and all of the
numbers we might want to use we can
start to write equations like we could
write
zero equals zero
so these symbols have the goodal numbers
six five six
and we can actually create a new card
that represents
this equation zero equals zero and the
way we do it
is we take the prime numbers starting at
and we raise each one to the power of
the goodal number of the symbol in our
equation
so we have 2 to the power of 6 times 3
to the power of 5
times 5 to the power of 6 equals 243
million
so 243 million is the goodal number
of the whole equation zero equals
zero we can write down little numbers
for any set of symbols that you can
imagine
so really this is an infinite deck of
cards
where any set of symbols that you want
to write down
in a sequence you can represent with a
unique
goodell number and the beauty of this
goodell number is
you can do a prime factorization of it
and you can work out
exactly what symbols made up
this card so in this whole pack of cards
there are going to be true statements
and there are going to be false
statements so how do you prove that
something is true
well you need to go to the axioms
the axioms also have their own goodal
numbers which are formed in the same way
so here's an axiom which says not
the successor of any number x equals
zero which makes sense because in this
system
there are no negative numbers and so the
successor of any number cannot be zero
so we can put down this axiom and then
we can substitute in
zero for x saying that one does not
equal
zero and we've created a proof this is
the
simplest proof i can think of that shows
that one
does not equal zero now this card for
the proof
of one does not equal zero gets its own
goodal number and the way we calculate
this goodall number
is just as before we take the prime
numbers and we raise 2 to the power of
the axiom times 3 to the power of
1 does not equal 0 and we get
a tremendously large number it would
have 73 million digits
if you calculated it all out so i've
just left it here in exponential
notation
as you can see these numbers get very
large and so
you might want to start just calling
them by letters so we could say this one
is goodal number a this is goodall
number b
goodall number c and so on
goodl goes to all this trouble to find
this card which says
there is no proof for the statement with
goodall number
g the trick is
that the goodall number of this card is
g so what this statement is really
saying
is this card is unprovable there is no
proof
anywhere in our infinite deck for this
card
now think about it if it's false and
there is a proof
then what you have just proven is there
is no proof
so you're stuck with a contradiction
that would mean the mathematical system
is inconsistent
the other alternative is that this card
is true there is no proof for the
statement with goodall number g
but that means this mathematical system
has true statements in it that have no
proof
so your mathematical system is
incomplete
and that is goodall's incompleteness
theorem
this is how he shows that any basic
mathematical system that can do
fundamental arithmetic will always have
statements within it which are true but
which have
no proof there's a line in the tv show
the office that
echoes the self-referential paradox of
goodell's proof
jim is my enemy but it turns out the jim
is also his own worst enemy
and the enemy of my enemy is my friend
so jim
is actually my friend
but because he is his own worst enemy
the enemy of my friend is my enemy so
actually jim is my enemy
but
goodell's incompleteness theorem means
that truth and provability
are not at all the same thing hilbert
was wrong
there will always be true statements
about mathematics that just cannot be
proven
now hilbert could console himself with
the hope that at least we could still
prove maths
consistent that is free of
contradictions
but then goodell published his second
incompleteness theorem
in which he showed that any consistent
formal system of math
cannot prove its own consistency so
taken together goodl's two
incompleteness theorems say that the
best you can hope for
is a consistent yet incomplete system of
math
but a system like that cannot prove its
own consistency
so some contradiction could always crop
up in the future
revealing that the system you'd been
working with had been inconsistent the
whole time
and that leaves only the third and final
big question from hilbert
is mathematics decidable that is is
there an algorithm that can always
determine whether a statement follows
from the axioms
and in 1936 alan turing found a way to
settle this question
but to do it he had to invent the modern
computer
in his time computers weren't machines
they were people
often women who carried out long and
tedious calculations
turing imagined an entirely mechanical
computer
he wanted it to be powerful enough to
perform any computation imaginable
but simple enough that you could reason
through its operation
so he came up with a machine that takes
as input an
infinitely long tape of square cells
each containing
a zero or a one the machine has a read
write head
that can read one digit at a time then
it can perform
one of only a few tasks overwrite a new
value
move left move right or simply
halt halting means the program has run
to completion the program consists of a
set of
internal instructions you can think of
it like a flow chart that tells the
machine what to do
based on the digit it reads and its
internal state
you could imagine exporting these
instructions to any other turing machine
which would then perform in exactly the
same way as the first
although this sounds simple a turing
machine's arbitrarily large memory and
program
mean it can execute any computable
algorithm
if given enough time from addition and
subtraction
to the entire youtube algorithm it can
do anything
a modern computer can that's what made
the turing machine so useful in
answering hilbert's question on
decidability when a touring machine
halts
the program has finished running and the
tape is the output
but sometimes a touring machine never
halts maybe it gets stuck in an infinite
loop
is it possible to tell beforehand if a
program will halt or not
on a particular input turing realized
this halting problem
was very similar to the decidability
problem if he could find a way to figure
out if a turing machine would halt
then it would also be possible to decide
if a statement followed from the axioms
for example you could solve the twin
prime conjecture by writing a turing
machine program
that starts with the axioms and
constructs all theorems that can be
produced in one step
using the rules of inference then it
constructs all theorems that can be
produced in one step from those
and so on each time it generates a new
theorem
it checks if it's the twin prime
conjecture and if it is
it halts if not it never halts
so if you could solve the halting
problem you could solve the twin prime
conjecture and all sorts of other
unsolved questions
so turing said let's assume we can make
a machine
h that can determine whether any turing
machine will halt or not
on a particular input you insert the
program and its input
and h simulates what will happen
printing out either
halts or never halts for now
we don't worry about how h works we just
know that it always works it always
gives you
the right answer now we can modify the h
machine by adding additional components
one if it receives the output halts
immediately goes into an
infinite loop another if it receives
never holds
then it immediately halts we can call
this entire new machine
h plus and we can export the program
for that entire machine
now what happens if we give this machine
its own
code both as program and input
well now h is simulating what h plus
would do
given its own input essentially h
has to determine the behavior of a
machine that it
itself is a part of in this exact
circumstance if h
concludes that h plus never halts
well this makes h plus immediately halt
if h thinks h plus will halt well then
that necessarily forces h
plus to loop
whatever output the halting machine h
gives
it turns out to be wrong there's a
contradiction
the only explanation can be that a
machine like h
can't exist there's no way to tell in
general if a touring machine will halt
or not
on a given input and this means
mathematics is undecidable there is no
algorithm
that can always determine whether a
statement is derivable from the axioms
so something like the twin prime
conjecture might be
unsolvable we might never know
whether there are infinite twin primes
or not
the problem of undecidability even crops
up
in physical systems in quantum mechanics
one of the most
important properties of a many-body
system is the difference in energy
between its ground state
and its first excited state this is
known as the spectral gap
some systems have a significant spectral
gap whereas others
are gapless there are a continuum of
energy levels
all the way down to the ground state and
this is important because
at low temperatures gapless quantum
systems can undergo phase
transitions while gapped systems cannot
they don't have the energy needed to
overcome the spectral gap
but figuring out if a system is gapped
or
gapless has long been known to be a very
difficult problem only recently in 2015
did mathematicians prove that in general
the spectral gap question
is undecidable to quote the authors
even a perfect complete description of
the microscopic interactions between a
material's particles
is not always enough to deduce its
macroscopic properties
now remember that turing designed his
machines to be as powerful computers
as it is possible to make to this day
the best computational systems
are those that can do everything a
touring machine can
this is called touring completeness and
it turns out
there are many such during complete
systems
although they are powerful every touring
complete system comes with a catch
its own analog of the halting problem
some undecidable property of the system
wang tiles are touring complete their
halting problem is
whether or not they'll tile the plane
complex quantum systems
are turing complete and their halting
problem is the spectral gap question
and the game of life is turing complete
its halting problem
is literally whether or not it halts
there are many more examples of this
like airline ticketing systems
magic the gathering powerpoint slides
and excel spreadsheets
nearly every programming language in
existence is designed to be turing
complete
but in theory we only need one
programming language because
well you can program anything at all
using any turing complete system
so here's a touring machine inside the
game of life
and since the game of life is itself
touring complete
it should be capable of simulating
itself and indeed
it is
this is the game of life
running on the game of life
the real legacy of david hilbert's dream
is all of our modern computational
devices
kurt godel suffered bouts of mental
instability later in life
convinced that people were trying to
poison him he refused
to eat eventually starving himself to
death
hilbert died in 1943 his epitaph was his
slogan from 1930.
we must know we will know the truth is
we don't know sometimes we can't
know but in trying to find out
we can discover new things things that
change the world
alan turing put his ideas about
computing to practical use in world war
ii
leading the team at bletchley park that
built real calculating machines to crack
nazi codes for the allies
by one estimate the intelligence turing
and his colleagues gathered from
decrypted messages
shortened the war by two to four years
after the war
turing and john von neumann designed the
first true
programmable electronic computer eniac
based on touring's designs
but turing didn't live to see his ideas
develop much further
in 1952 the british government convicted
him of gross indecency
upon learning he was gay he was stripped
of his security clearance and forced to
take hormones
in 1954 he committed suicide
touring changed the world he is widely
considered to be the most important
founding figure in computer science
all modern computers are descended from
his designs
but touring's ideas about computability
came from his concept of the turing
machine
which came from thinking about hilbert's
question is math decidable
so touring's code breaking machines and
indeed all modern
computers stem from the weird paradoxes
that arise from self-reference
there is a hole at the bottom of math a
hole
that means we will never know everything
with certainty
there will always be true statements
that cannot be proven
and you might think this realization
would have driven mathematicians mad
and led to the disintegration of the
entire mathematical enterprise
but instead thinking about this problem
transformed the concept of
infinity changed the course of a world
war
and led directly to the invention of the
device
you're watching this on right now
[Music]
hey this video was sponsored by
brilliant a website full of interactive
courses and quizzes that delve deep
into topics like math physics and
computer science now if you've gotten
this far
into this video you're likely someone
who would love brilliant
i've been going through their logic
course and it's really got me thinking
the problems start out easy but get more
and more challenging as you develop your
understanding
and that's what i love about the site i
love how it guides you
not by telling you exactly but by
exposing you to increasingly
sophisticated puzzles
and at the end i feel like i've worked
it out for myself which
essentially i have through their
carefully curated selection of problems
and with helpful hints and explanations
for when i get stuck
now there were a lot of things i wanted
to include in this video but couldn't
because it's already over half an hour
long so
if you want to explore these ideas
further i'd highly recommend their
courses on number theory and computer
science fundamentals
for viewers of this channel brilliant
are offering 20
off an annual subscription to the first
200 people to sign up
just go to brilliant.org veritasium and
i will put that link down
in the description so i want to thank
brilliant for sponsoring veritasium and
i want to thank you
for watching